welcome back everyone Laszlo Montgomery
here part three of our limited-edition
ten-year anniversary special I was gonna
livestream something to mark the
occasion so that we could all hang out
together but I couldn't figure out how
to do that I know there's a way so
rather than having that close encounter
with y'all I'm rehashing an old CHP
episode that was in dire need of
rehashing and considering the less than
optimal state of relations between the
USA and the PRC as of this morning
anyway
well I for one think this story was
worth dredging up and retelling maybe a
lesson or two in there to guide us
through these fetid and murky diplomatic
waters we find ourselves in this year of
the rat we left off last time with the
bombing of Laos and no end in sight of
the Vietnam conflict the US was having a
heck of a time trying to win those
hearts and minds amidst this fog of war
but on the us-china front there was
still hope February 1971 Nixon referred
to China as the People's Republic of
China in his state of the world speech
this was the first time the official
name of China was used publicly by an
American leader Nixon had uttered those
eight syllables prior to being elected
but this was the first time it was said
by a president the overtures Nixon gave
in this speech were all well received
passport restrictions on China were
lifted as was the 20-year old trade
embargo then a March 21st 1971 the
Chinese ping-pong team arrived in Nagoya
Japan for the World Championships the
American team at the beg borrow and
steal to make their way to Japan to be
part of this competition and being
ranked 24th in the world no one was
expecting any great things to come out
of them the star of the team by an
astronomical unit was 19 year old Glenn
Cohen with his long hair floppy yellow
hat tie-dye jeans he was quite a
colorful figure in the
press had a field day with him he had
secret edita Becky and his luggage and
was able to enjoy the occasional spliff
during this moment in the spotlight
during the competition on April 4th one
of those random things happen that just
defines a moment in history Glen :
accidentally boarded the Chinese team
bus that was enroute to some tourist
destinations of pearl farm and through
an interpreter he spontaneously struck
up a conversation with China's star
player Tuan sadang they sat there on the
bus and chit chatted no doubt everyone
was freaked out at this outgoing uber
America and with his hippie appearance
you didn't see that every day in China
especially during the Cultural
Revolution which was still going on by
the way
Duong took out a small gift from his
stash of Jian Li a little silkscreen
banner or handkerchief with a picture of
Huang Shan and presented it to Cohen
Glenn Cohen was as ignorant as the next
American as far as China went but he
made this amazing connection with the
Chinese players the next day he
presented Tuan sadang with a t-shirt
with a peace sign on it and the words
let it be now it was a song written by a
popular British band from Liverpool they
had a bunch of hits during the 60s
everything was caught on film and these
reporters and photographers thought they
died and went to heaven at what was
unfolding before their eyes they came
for a ping pong tournament and got this
instead the press got it all on film and
it was all over the front pages and a
Japanese press showed these two shaking
hands on the bus like they were
long-lost brothers and to make matters
even more interesting Cohen had
mentioned how he sure wish the US team
could visit China to compete well of
course this was big news in China and at
first Joe and Maul were dead set against
the notion of allowing the US table
tennis team into China for what was sure
to be a spectacle
but mal later came around and in a
famous story well documented by Mao's
grandniece late in the evening on April
6th
he called her into his bedroom which was
also his study and where he hung out all
the time and he told her to go ahead and
invite the American ping-pong team to
China all expenses paid to April 10th
1971 the US team crossed the law will
border between Hong Kong and China and
off they went on this magical mystery
tour that lasted ten days they took in
the sights and Guangzhou Shanghai and
Beijing and when the Americans faced off
against their Chinese opponents in the
stadium well this was a mismatch to say
the least but the NBA all-stars were two
professional basketball
that's who China was in the world at
Table Tennis and still are I'm betting
so believe me the Chinese team gave a
little face to the Americans allowed
themselves to be beaten a few times and
didn't humiliate the Americans too bad
there was even a banner hanging at the
competition that said friendship first
competition second thanks for the face
China you could say all the hard work
secret negotiations and sending
clandestine notes back and forth and
sending all these diplomatic signals and
then setback after setback and one
missed opportunity after another finally
there was no turning back now the
international press just jumped all over
this one as soon as it was announced and
the term ping-pong diplomacy was born
the US team was given a dazzling welcome
upon their arrival in China
choreographed by premier Joe himself and
boy when it came to organizing events
Joe and line knew how to do it up right
you know there is a credible theory that
this whole thing that happened in Nagoya
was a setup and that Joe and I had even
plotted with trongsa dong to try and
engage the Americans and I don't know
start a conversation or do something to
break the ice
who knows certainly sounded like
something Premier Joe might think up the
coverage was just unbelievable and the
whole idea of how an obscure sporting
event in April of 1971 turned into
front-page news all over the world it
was just a huge story in itself
Nixon was giddy from all the positive
press it got and how it reflected well
on him and sorta carved in stone this
inevitability of us-china diplomatic
relations if there ever was a time to
grab this political capital and use it
for the most difficult sensitive and
Sisyphean task of all now is the time
hanging out there for all to see was the
largest festering wound a great
malignancy on the us-china relationship
the Taiwan question still unresolved
since World War two they were our
friends and close allies going back to
the days of Sun yat-sen we fought the
good fight with them in World War two
and we backed them to the hilt in the
civil war against Mao's Communists when
they retreated to Taiwan in 1949 we
stuck with them all these years and
protected them by putting them
underneath our strategic military
umbrella and they had always been a
goldmine of intelligence and insight
into China and we had a lot of American
troops there as well all these years Mao
had barked but never bit the PLA never
invaded Taiwan because it meant war with
the United States suddenly now Taiwan
wasn't such a matter worth fighting for
the Americans but the issue was of
paramount importance to the PRC what we
call a core interest today nothing even
came close to this in terms of its
relative importance compared to all
other issues
Kissinger knew and Nixon knew there was
no use even bothering to talk to China
unless this issue was dragged out put on
the table and discussed definitively
Desai
Sibley and once and for all meanwhile
April 14th the u.s. ping-pong team was
still in Beijing and premier Joe hosted
a banquet for them at the Great Hall of
the People no less and he toasted them
and said quote you have opened up a new
chapter in the relations of the American
and Chinese people I am confident that
this beginning again of our friendship
will certainly meet with the majority
support of our two peoples end quote and
never anyone to miss an opportunity to
ask an uncomfortable question
Glenn Cohen had asked premier Joe that
night what he when he thought about the
hippie movement in the United States and
after someone explain to him what a
hippie was Joe said quote youth wants to
seek the truth and out of this search
various forms of change are bound to
come forth when we were young
it was the same - end quote Joe and I
ladies and gentlemen the bus was really
gathering momentum now all that remained
was to discuss dates and of course for
Nixon to figure out how to handle Taiwan
to reciprocate China's graciousness the
Chinese team was invited to play in the
US and Joe accepted the invitation so
the love fest was still going on but
there was nothing concrete about who or
when a meeting might take place until
the Pakistani ambassador visited Nixon
in Palm Springs with a message from Joe
and live at read quote at present
contacts between the PRC in the US are
being reviewed
however if relations between China and
the US are to be restored fundamentally
the u.s. must withdraw all its armed
forces from China's Taiwan and Taiwan
Straits area a solution to this critical
question can be found only through
direct discussions between high-level
responsible persons of the two countries
therefore the Chinese government
reaffirms its willingness to receive
publicly in Beijing a special envoy of
the President of the United States or
even the President of the United States
himself for a direct meeting and
discussions of course if the US
president considers that the time is
not yet right the matter may be deferred
to a later date
as for the modalities procedure and
other details of the high-level meeting
and discussions in Beijing as they are
of no substantive significance it is
believed that it is entirely possible
for public arrangements to be made
through the good offices of President
Yahya Khan and quote even though Joe had
mentioned meeting publicly Nixon wasn't
quite ready for that yet it had to be a
total surprise a fete accompli before he
could announce a presidential visit and
bask in that moment of historic glory
Kissinger wasn't Nixon's first choice
for envoy but in the end he turned out
to be the best man for this sensitive
historic and monumental task
Nixon replied to Joe and lye on May 10th
1971 sending the following response
referring to himself in the third person
as was his habit quote President Nixon
has carefully studied the message of
April 21st 1971 from premier Joe and Lai
conveyed through the courtesy of
President Yahya Khan President Nixon
agrees that direct high-level
negotiations are necessary to resolve
the issues dividing the United States of
America and the People's Republic of
China because of the importance he
attaches to normalizing relations
between our two countries President
Nixon is prepared to accept the
suggestion of premier Joe and lie that
he visit Peking for direct conversations
with the leaders of the People's
Republic of China at such a meeting each
side would be free to raise the issue of
principle concern to it in order to
prepare the visit by President Nixon and
to establish reliable contact with the
leaders of the Chinese People's Republic
President Nixon proposes a preliminary
secret meeting between his assistant for
national security affairs dr. Henry
Kissinger and premier Joe and Lai or
another appropriate high-level Chinese
official dr. Kissinger would be prepared
to attend such a meeting on Chinese soil
preferably at some location with
inconvenient flying distance from
Pakistan
be suggested by the People's Republic of
China dr. Kissinger would be authorized
to discuss the circumstances which would
make a visit by President Nixon most
useful the agenda of such a meeting the
time of such a visit and to begin
preliminary exchange of views and all
subjects of mutual interest if it should
be thought desirable that a special
emissary come to Peking publicly between
the secret visit to the People's
Republic of China of dr. Kissinger and
the arrival of President Nixon dr.
Kissinger will be authorized to arrange
it it is anticipated that the visit of
President Nixon to Peking could be
announced within a short time of the
secret meeting between dr. Kissinger and
premier Joe and Lai dr. Kissinger will
be prepared to come from June 15th
onward it is proposed that the precise
details of dr. Kissinger's trip
including the location duration of stay
communication and similar matters be
discussed through the good offices of
President Yahya Khan for secrecy it is
essential that no other channel be used
it is also understood that this first
meeting between dr. Kissinger and high
officials of the People's Republic of
China be strictly secret and quote On
June 2nd Joe's reply was positive and
that he warmly welcomed a presidential
envoy to Beijing while the US ping-pong
team was in Beijing having their great
moments Nixon released a statement
through his press secretary that stated
quote in the coming year I will
carefully examine what further steps we
might take to create broader
opportunities for context between the
Chinese and American people's and how we
might remove needless obstacles to the
realization of these opportunities I
asked the under secretaries committee of
the National Security Council to make
the appropriate recommendations to bring
this about the United States is prepared
to expedite visas for visitors or groups
of visitors from the People's Republic
of China to the United States the US
currency controls are to be relaxed to
permit the use of dollars by the
People's Republic of China
restrictions are to be ended on American
oil companies providing fuel to ships or
aircraft proceeding to and from China
except on Chinese owned or Chinese
chartered carriers bound to or from
North Vietnam North Korea or Cuba u.s.
vessels or aircraft may now carry
Chinese cargoes between non Chinese
ports and u.s. own flag carriers may
call at Chinese ports and quote the
details for Kissinger secret meeting
were meticulously hashed out in May of
1971 by this time in China mouths
anointed successor Lyn PL was already in
hot water and in a few months he and his
supporters will be fighting for their
political survival this was all playing
out in the background we had no idea
Nixon had responded to Joe's letter by
writing quote President Nixon
reciprocates premier Joe and lies
anticipation of the meeting between the
premier and dr. Kissinger he considers
it a hopeful first step in improving
relations between the United States and
the People's Republic of China and quote
Nixon had a ton of explaining to do to
the pro Taiwan faction and the
government the US ambassador to Taiwan
at the time was longtime American
diplomat Walter P McConaughey Nixon had
told this great career diplomat that it
was up to him to explain the situation
with their Republic of China allies in
Taiwan Nixon had said quote just say
that we that are as far as the Republic
of China is concerned that we have we
know who our friends are and we are
going to continue our close friendly
relations with them end quote
Nixon further said where john kai-shek
and the Taiwan leadership were concerned
quote they must be prepared for the fact
that there will continue to be a
step-by-step a more normal relationship
with the other the Chinese mainland
because our interests require it not
because we love them but because they're
there and quote and as far as the seat
at the UN and the all-powerful Security
Council
Nixon downplayed the matter and it said
to ambassador McConaughey that Taiwan
should not put so much faith in that
institution he said quote I would just
say the hell with the UN what is it
anyway it's a damn debating society what
good does it do end quote
his Nixon ponder the decoupling from
Taiwan he urged Kissinger to do
everything he could not to make these
discussions with Jo look like the US was
selling Taiwan down the river without a
paddle which was essentially what was
being done the dates of July 9th to 11th
1971 were selected for the secret visit
by Kissinger when the time came
Kissinger and his team of Winston Lord
John Holdrege and Richard Schmeiser flew
to Saigon then Bangkok New Delhi and
finally to Rawalpindi just south of
Islamabad if anyone was wondering what
Nixon's national security adviser was
doing they would be told he was in Asia
on a fact-finding trip under the
direction of the president before
sunrise on July 9th Kissinger secretly
boarded a Pakistani Airways Boeing 707
for Beijing besides themselves the only
other people who knew about this were
Nixon and Alexander Haig
to explain his absence for two days
Kissinger staff maintained that he was
recuperating from stomach problems being
a westerner in Pakistan at all it was a
perfectly believable ploy Kissinger and
his team flew six hours across China and
landed in Beijing around noon Marshall
gets yin yang and the veteran diplomat
Wan hua met him at the airport
they were whisked to do you tie in
western Beijing where foreign
dignitaries were ensconced and were so
many meetings had taken place with
visiting big shots Kissinger and he
didn't know it at the time but North
Korean dictator Kim il-sung was in situ
at di Utah on a state visit
Kissinger got to his villa and four
hours later Joanne Lai entered his room
and you had the great photo-op of the
two meeting and shaking hands between
having to also deal with Kimmel song and
all the sightseeing plan for the
visiting Americans there really wasn't
more than perhaps 24 hours reserved for
face to face discussions after all the
pleasantries were exchanged they sat
down on one of those patented Chinese
overstuffed sofas and Kissinger was
given a free lesson in diplomacy from
the master Henry Kissinger was only 48
years old the visiting team sitting next
to a man it was not only the premier of
China outranking him a few notches
diplomatically speaking but a man who
was a true revolutionary and a nation
builder as much as Jefferson Madison or
a Moulton were to the founding of
America he was a statesman
extraordinaire very respected in
diplomatic circles his contemporaries on
the world stage had been guys like
Roosevelt de Gaulle Churchill
nehru-gandhi Stalin when Kissinger was
born in 1923 Joe was already a seasoned
25 year old revolutionary living in
Paris and playing a role in all the
history about to unfold in China and
here was Kissinger sitting with this
great and elegant man who modestly hid
his street cred and appeared so cool and
calm and collected in control without
acting like he was in control and in the
next episode we will pick up here in
this first meeting between Joe and ly
and Henry Kissinger during the July 1971
secret trip needless to say after so
many years there was a lot to catch up
on do consider coming back for that
until then this is a Lhasa Montgomery
signing off from LA City in the smog
join me next time amigo CMEs for another
exciting episode or the China history
podcast
did I mention at the outset that this is
a special 10-year anniversary edition no
well it is take care everyone